Enterprise data models;
Data/Information Architectures
and Data Integration

Integrated Systems 2024/2025

“Traditional" Data Model

• Vision: Provide a single primary store of data for
core business applications such as accounting
(general ledger, accounts payable, accounts
receivable, payroll, etc.), finance, personnel,
procurement, and others. One application might
write a new record into the database that would
then be used by another application.

*Simon, Alan (2014). Enterprise Business Intelligence and Data Management || The Rebirth of Enterprise
Data Management.

What happens with integration?
• What usually happens in all
organizations and enterprises is
fragmentation of data
• The result is not having a single
truth data for all departments!

Enterprise Data Models
• Definition: Enterprise Data Model is an integrated view of the data produced and consumed across an entire
organization. EDM is the foundation of all other kinds of data systems, which can be implemented in the
organization.
• Pros:
• Integrated view of the data across the organization.
• Independent of how the data is stored, processed or accessed
• Independent of the system or the applications that the organization uses
• It is a single integrated definition of the data for the organization, and it incorporates the industry
perspective.
• It provides framework for supporting planning, building and implementation of data systems.
• EDM is mandatory for data integration.
• Cons:
• EDM, if not planned and done properly, becomes stale before product reaches production?

Distributed
Database
Management
Systems

Data
warehouses
and read
only access
DBs

The objectives of any EDM
Organization-wise:
1. Eliminating chaos and bringing order to data, reporting, and analytics
2. Building a foundation that best supports other emerging technologies and new or enhanced
applications
3. Converting slogans about the “goodness” of data from trite sayings to reality
4. Ensuring that whatever approach your roadmap does specify is appropriately aligned with your
organization’s structure and culture
Data-wise:
1. Identify data quality issues, outliers and errors
2. Identify data strategy gaps and plan solutions

3. Identify relationship and dependencies between data sets

Modern challenges for EDM
• Data volumes are exploding, and even if organizations can apply data warehousing appliances
and Big Data technologies and architecture to deal with the data volumes, meaningful progress
will be hard to come by without an accompanying well-formulated EDM roadmap.
• Why we actually need them?
• Data quality
• Data ownership
• Data System Extensibility
• Data Integration
• Strategic Systems Planning

Types of Data
Models
•

West, Matthew (2011). Developing High Quality
Data Models || Some Types and Uses of Data Models

Why Is Data Modeling the Building Block of
Enterprise Data Management?
DM mitigates complexity and
increases collaboration and
literacy across a broad range of
data stakeholders.

DM builds higher quality data
sources with the appropriate
structural veracity.
• DM delivers design task standardization
to improve business alignment and
simplify integration.

*https://erwin.com/blog/enterprise-data-management-and-data-governance/

DM uncovers the connections
between disparate data
elements.

DM captures and shares how
the business describes and
uses data.

• The DM process enables the creation
and integration of business and
semantic metadata to augment and
accelerate data governance and
intelligence efforts.

• DM delivers design task automation
and enforcement to ensure data
integrity.

DM builds a more agile and
governable data architecture.

DM governs the design and
deployment of data across the
enterprise.

• The DM process manages the design
and maintenance lifecycle for data
sources.

• DM documents, standardizes and aligns
any type of data no matter where it
lives.

The benefit of EDMs
• Modeling becomes the point of true collaboration within an organization because it delivers a
visual source of truth for everyone to follow – data management and business professionals – to
conform to governance requirements.
• Information is readily available within intuitive business glossaries, accessible to user roles
according to parameters set by the business. The metadata repository behind these glossaries,
populated by information stored in data models, serves up the key terms that are understandable
and meaningful to every party in the enterprise.

• The stage, then, is equally set for improved data intelligence, because stakeholders now can use,
understand and trust relevant data to enhance decision-making across the enterprise.

Levels of EDM
• Subject Area Model
• The data is broken into subject areas, divided as Revenue, Operation,
and Support. Each of those areas is defined with transactional,
foundational, and informational data.

• Conceptual Model:
• Based on the main business practices of the organization, major
business concepts are being identified and linked to each of the
defined areas in level one.

• Conceptual Entity Model,
• The identified concepts are recognized as important to the business
entity, looking at company needs, understanding of business terms,
defining additional details, and recognizing the relationship between
the concepts.

Data Model VS Data Architecture
• Data modelling focuses on the representation of the data while data
architecture is concerned with what tools and platforms to use for
storing and analysing it.
• Data modelling is all about the accuracy of data while data architecture
is about the infrastructure housing that data.
• Data modelling is concerned with the reliability of the data, while data
architecture is concerned with keeping the data safe.
• A data model is an attempted representation of reality, while data
architecture is a framework of systems and logistics.
• A data model represents a limited set of business concepts and how
they relate to one another. Data architecture covers the data
infrastructure of the entire organization.

Data VS Information Architecture
• Data architecture is intended for development of systems that
interpret and store data
• Information architecture refers to the design of systems intended
for input, storage and analysis of meaningful information.
• When we say “Data” we refer to a set of facts that are usually raw
and uncategorized
• When we say “Information” we have already put several pieces of
data in a meaningful way.

Data Architecture
A data architecture should set data
standards for all its data systems as
a vision or a model of the eventual
interactions between those data
systems.

Data integration, for example, should be
dependent upon data architecture
standards since data integration requires
data interactions between two or more
data systems.

A data architecture, in part, describes
the data structures used by
a business and
its computer applications software.

Data architectures address data in
storage, data in use and data in motion;
descriptions of data stores, data groups
and data items; and mappings of those
data artifacts to data qualities,
applications, locations etc.

Data
architecture
processes

• Conceptual - represents all business entities.
• Logical - represents the logic of how entities
are related.
• Physical - the realization of the data
mechanisms for a specific type of functionality.
When designing data architecture, the primary
goal is to identify any data entity, or any real or
abstracted thing about which an organization or
individual wishes to store data.

Information architecture
• Information Architecture is the design and organisation of content, pages and data into a structure that aids users understanding of
a system.
• Definitions:
• The structural design of shared information environments.
• The art and science of organizing and labelling web sites, intranets, online communities, and software to support findability
and usability.
• An emerging community of practice focused on bringing principles of design and architecture to the digital landscape.
• The combination of organization, labelling, search and navigation systems within websites and intranets.
• Extracting required parameters/data of Engineering Designs in the process of creating a knowledge-base linking different systems
and standards.
• A blueprint and navigational aid to the content of information-rich systems.
• A subset of data architecture where usable data (a.k.a. information) is constructed in and designed or arranged in a fashion most
useful or empirically holistic to the users of this data.
• The practice of organizing the information / content / functionality of a web site so that it presents the best user experience it can,
with information and services being easily usable and findable (as applied to web design and development).
• The conceptual framework surrounding information, providing context, awareness of location and sustainable structure.

Information architecture components
• Organization systems are the categories in which we place information,
such as author names and titles or shoe size, fabric and color.
• Labeling systems are the ways we represent information, such as the level of
terminology considered appropriate for the target audience. For example,
should articles use the terms "optometrist" and "ophthalmologist," or is "eye
doctor" more appropriate?
• Navigation systems are the way we move from one piece of information to
another when that information is presented to us. On this page, for instance,
you could use the Next button to get to the next page, or you could begin
exploring something new at any time using the tabs like Adventure and Tech
at the top of the page.
• Searching systems are the way we search for information, such as entering
words in a search engine or scanning for terms in a numbered list. For
example, in the search box on this page, you could type multiple words to
narrow the results and get closer to the topics you want to read about.

The 8 principles of Information
Architecture Design
The principle of
objects: Content should be
treated as a living, breathing
thing. It has lifecycles,
behaviors, and attributes.

The principle of front
doors: Assume that at least
50% of users will use a
different entry point than
the home page.

The principle of
choices: Less is more. Keep
the number of choices to a
minimum.

The principle of
disclosure:Show a preview
of information that will help
users understand what kind
of information is hidden if
they dig deeper.

The principle of
exemplars: Show examples
of content when describing
the content of the
categories.

The principle of multiple
classifications: Offer users
several different
classification schemes to
browse the site’s content.

The principle of focused
navigation: Keep navigation
simple and never mix
different things.

The principle of
growth: Assume that the
content on the website will
grow. Make sure the website
is scalable.

https://careerfoundry.com/en/blog/ux-design/a-beginners-guide-to-information-architecture/

Value of Information Architectures

Models for content
organization

• For web sites but other applications also follow same
principles:
• Single page (personal web sites, focused web sites)
• Flat (agencies, business sites)
• Index (similar to flat, portfolios, ecomerce sites)
• Daisy (Moodle)
• Strict hierarchy (Moodle)
• Multidimensional hierarchy (Wikipedia)

Enterprise Information Architecture (EIA)
• It links technical, application and data architecture with the strategic plan of the enterprise.
• A well-documented architecture is a logical organization of information pertaining to the
following corporate-level, enterprise-wide elements:
• Strategic goals, objectives, and strategies
• Business rules and measures
• Information requirements
• Application systems
• Relationships between applications and data elements
• Technology infrastructure

Information architectures and Big Data
• The primary characteristics of Big Data (Volume, Velocity, and Variety) are a challenge to existing
architectures and the systems ability to effectively, efficiently and economically process data to
achieve operational efficiencies.
• Information Architecture provides the methods and tools for organizing, labelling, building
relationships (through associations), and describing (through metadata) the unstructured
content adding this source to the overall pool of Big Data.
• In addition, information architecture enables Big Data to rapidly explore and analyse any
combination of structured, semi-structured and unstructured sources.
• Big Data requires information architecture to exploit relationships and synergies between the
data. This infrastructure enables organizations to make decisions utilizing the full spectrum of
their big data sources.

Big data architecture
• Big data architecture refers to
the logical and physical structure
that dictates how high volumes
of data are ingested, processed,
stored, managed, and accessed.

Data Integration

• Transform structured and unstructured data from
different sources into a trusted, unified view available to
any system.

• Integration begins with the ingestion process, and
includes steps such as cleansing, ETL mapping, and
transformation.
• There is no universal approach to data integration.
However, data integration solutions typically involve a
few common elements, including a network of data
sources, a master server, and clients accessing data
from the master server.

Why we need data integration?
• Improves collaboration and unification of systems within an organization
• Saves time and boosts efficiency
• Reduces errors
• Delivers more valuable information
• Example:
• Without unified data, a single report typically involves logging into multiple accounts, on
multiple sites, accessing data within native apps, copying over the data, reformatting, and
cleansing, all before analysis can happen. Conducting all these operations as efficiently as
possible highlights the importance of data integration.

https://www.omnisci.com/technical-glossary/data-integration

Data integration in modern business
• There is no one size fits all.
• Data Lakes
• Data Warehouses
• Data lakes and data warehouses are both widely used for storing big data, but they are not
interchangeable terms. A data lake is a vast pool of raw data, the purpose for which is not yet
defined. A data warehouse is a repository for structured, filtered data that has already been
processed for a specific purpose.

https://www.talend.com/resources/data-lake-vs-data-warehouse/#:~:text=Data%20lakes%20and%20data%20warehouses,processed%20for%20a%20specific%20purpose.

Data Lake VS
Data
Warehouse

Data Lake

Data Warehouse

Type of data

Unstructured and structured data
from various company data
sources

Historical data that has been
structured to fit a relational
database schema

Purpose

Cost-effective big data storage

Analytics for business decisions

Users

Data scientists and engineers

Data analysts and business
analysts

Tasks

Storing data and big data
analytics, like deep learning and
real-time analytics

Typically read-only queries for
aggregating and summarizing
data

Size

Stores all data that might be
used—can take up petabytes!

Only stores data relevant to
analysis

Data Lake

• A Data Lake is a storage repository that can store a
large amount of structured, semi-structured, and
unstructured data. It is a place to store every type of
data in its native format with no fixed limits on account
size or file. It offers a large amount of data quantity for
increased analytical performance and native
integration.
• Data Lake is like a large container which is very similar
to real lake and rivers. Just like in a lake, you have
multiple tributaries coming in; similarly, a data lake has
structured data, unstructured data, machine to
machine, logs flowing through in real-time.

https://www.guru99.com/data-lake-vs-data-warehouse.html

Data Lake
• A data lake can add a lot of value to your organization if you:
• Work with Big Data and need to handle volume, velocity or a variety of
data.
• Have a data science role or machine learning/AI where you need to do a
broader exploration of data that may not yet have a known analytical
value.
• Value speed over accuracy (meaning you prioritize the ability to analyze
data quickly over a more formal IT extract, transform and load process).

Data Warehouse

Data Extraction

Data Cleaning

Data
Transformation

Data Loading
and Refreshing

Data warehouse
• The data warehouse is generally more beneficial for organizations
because it allows them to:
• Provide the single source of truth that businesses expect in most cases.
• Ensure you have a quality, analytical data model that lends itself to slicing
and dicing the data.
• Guarantee that you have accurate data when users are doing a self-service
scenario off that model.

Combining
everything

• AWS eco system and Azure eco system

Traditional (Old) VS Modern architectures

Questions?

